Author: Samuel Solorzano Ramirez (A00354798)

Course: Software Engineering

The Pragmatic Programmer 
=====

Ch. 4 - Design by Contract
=====

Use the same concept of contract: A contract defines your rights and responsibilities, as well as those of the other party, in Software Design.

Every function and method in a software system does something. DBC  is a simple yet powerful technique that focuses on documenting (and agreeing to) the rights and responsibilities of software modules to ensure program correctness.

Meyer describes these expectations and claims as follows:

- Pre-Conditions
  -  the routine’s requirements.
- Post-Conditions
  - the state of the world when the routine is done.
- Class invariants
  - Ensures that this condition is always true from the perspective of a caller.

Use assertions every time to allow the compiler to check the contract.

For C there is Nana, a way to implement assertions and start using contracts right away.

DBC has the additional benefit of crashing early, since we assert because a pre-condition is not being met.

### Other uses of Invariants.

- Loop Invariant: 
  - is a statement of the eventual goal of a loop, but is generalized so that it is also valid before the loop executes and on each iteration through the loop.
- Semantic Invariant:
  - express inviolate requirements, a kind of “philosophical contract.” (i.e. the user of a debit card should never have the same transaction applied to their account twice)

Dead programs tell no lies
-----

If there is an error, something very, very bad has happened. Crash Early.

### Crash, Don't Trash

Detect the problems as soon as you can and crash early, to avoid potential loss of data or incorrect behavior.

Assertive Programming
-----

If It Can’t Happen, Use Assertions to Ensure That It Won’t, but be careful to Don’t use assertions in place of real error handling.

When to Use Exceptions
-----

Exceptions should be reserved for unexpected events. 

For example, if your code tries to open a file for reading and that file does not exist, should an exception be raised? Our answer is, “It depends.” If the file should have been there, then an exception is warranted. Something unexpected happened a file you were expecting to exist seems to have disappeared. On the other hand, if you have no idea whether the file should exist or not, then it doesn’t seem exceptional if you can’t find it, and an error return is appropriate.

How To Balance resources
-----

Most of the time, resource usage follows a predictable pattern: you allocate the resource, use it, and then deallocate it.

Finish What You Start, It simply means that the routine or object that allocates a resource should be responsible for deallocating it.

### Nest Allocations

There are just two more suggestions:

- Deallocate resources in the opposite order to that in which you allocate them.
- When allocating the same set of resources in different places in your code, always allocate them in the same order.

### When you can't balance resources

The trick here is to establish a semantic invariant for memory allocation. There are 3 options:

1. The top-level structure is also responsible for freeing any substructures that it contains. These structures then recursively delete data they contain, and so on.
2. The top-level structure is simply deallocated. Any structures that it pointed to (that are not referenced elsewhere) are orphaned.
3. The top-level structure refuses to deallocate itself if it contains any substructures.

### Checking the balance

Is always a good idea to build code that actually checks that resources are indeed freed appropriately.

Ch. 5 - Bend, or Break
=====

Decoupling and the Law of Demeter
-----

#### Minimize Coupling

A typical arrangement involves a “general contractor.” You hire the contractor to get the work done, but the contractor may or may not do the construction personally; the work may be offered to various subcontractors. But as the client, you are not involved in dealing with the subcontractors directly.

We’d like to follow this same model in software. When we ask an object for a particular service, we’d like the service to be performed on our behalf.

### The Law of Demeter for Functions

By writing “shy” code that honors the Law of Demeter as much as possible, we can achieve our objective: Minimize Coupling Between Modules.

The Law states that any method of an object should call only methods belonging to:

- Itself
- Any parameter that were passed in to the method
- any object it creates
- any directly held component objects

Metaprogramming
-----

Make the code configurable and adaptable to changes.

### Dynamic configuration

Configure, don't integrate.

Use metadata to describe configuration options for an application: tuning parameters, user preferences...

What is metadata? Is data about data.

Put Abstractions in Code, Details in Metadata.

- It forces you to decouple your design, which results in a more flexible and adaptable program.
- It forces you to create a more robust, abstract design by deferring details—deferring them all the way out of the program.
- You can customize the application without recompiling it. You can also use this level of customization to provide easy work-arounds for critical bugs in live production systems.
- Metadata can be expressed in a manner that’s much closer to the problem domain than a general-purpose programming language might be.
- You may even be able to implement several different projects using the same application engine, but with different metadata.

### Cooperative Configuration

Let applications configure each other. i.e. Operating systems already configure themselves to hardware as they boot.

### Don’t Write Dodo-Code

Species that don’t adapt die. Don't make your code not adaptable.

Temporal Coupling
-----

Time is an often ignored aspect of software architectures. There are two aspects of time that are important to us: concurrency (things happening at the same time) and ordering (the relative positions of things in time).

Analyze Workflow to Improve Concurrency.

Design Using Services, that are independent, concurrent objects behind well-defined, consistent interfaces.

### Design for Concurrency

Take care to protect variables for access from different processes/threads. Using DBC helps avoiding this.

### Cleaner Interfaces

Always Design for Concurrency. Example of strtok, where it retains it's state after being called, prevent this behavior.

It’s Just a View
-----

“divide and conquer” and separate a program into modules. Each module has its own responsibilities; in fact, a good definition of a module (or class) is that it has a single, well-defined responsibility.

How to talk between modules?

An event is simply a special message that says “something interesting just happened” (interesting, of course, lies in the eye of the beholder).

### Publish/Subscribe

Objects should be able to register to receive only the events they need, and should never be sent events they don’t need.

### Model-View-Controller

Separate Views from Models.

- Model. The abstract data model representing the target object. The model has no direct knowledge of any views or controllers.
- View. A way to interpret the model. It subscribes to changes in the model and logical events from the controller.
- Controller. A way to control the view and provide the model with new data. It publishes events to both the model and the view.

Blackboards
-----

Analogy of detective work, where different detectives writes to blackboard at any given time, and at some point they can make relation ships.

Use Blackboards to Coordinate Workflow.

A blackboard system lets us decouple our objects from each other completely, providing a forum where knowledge consumers and producers can exchange data anonymously and asynchronously.

The blackboard style of programming removes the need for so many interfaces, making for a more elegant and consistent system.

common interfaces to a blackboard (Javaspaces):

- read
- write
- take
- notify