Author: Samuel Solorzano Ramirez (A00354798)

Course: Software Engineering

Design Principles and Design Patterns
=====

Software architecture is at the highest level it defines the overall shape and structure of software applications, down a level the architecture is specifically related to the purpose of the software application. Yet another level down resides the architecture of modules and their interconnections, this is the domain of Design patterns.

Architecture and dependencies
-----

### Symptoms of Rotting Design

- Rigidity
  - Is the tendency of the Software to be difficult to change, even in simple ways. Every change causes a cascade of subsequent changes in dependent modules.
- Fragility
  - Is the tendency of the software to break in many places every time it is changed.
- Immobility
  - Is the inability to reuse software from other projects or from parts of the same project. (Rewrite instead of reuse)
- Viscosity
  - Viscosity of the design. When faced with a change, there are many ways to make the change. Some ways preserve the design, other do net (hacks). When the ways to preserve the design are harder to use, rather that the other, then the viscosity of the design are high.
  - Viscosity of the environment when the development env. is slow and inefficient. if compile times are very long, engineers will be tempted to make changes that don’t force large re-compiles, even though  those changes are not optimal from a design point of view.

These four symptoms are the tell-tale signs of poor architecture.

### Changing requirements

If our designs are failing due to the constant rain of changing requirements, it is our designs that are at fault. We must somehow find a way to make our designs resilient to such changes and protect them from rotting.

### Dependency management

The dependencies between modules in an application must be managed. This management consists of the creation of dependency firewalls. Object Oriented Design is replete with principles and techniques for building such firewalls, and for managing module dependencies.

Principles of Object Oriented Class Design
-----

### The Open Closed Principle (OCP)

A module should be open for extension but closed for modification. It means simply this: We should write our modules so that they can be extended, without requiring them to be modified. Abstraction is the key to the OCP.

#### Techniques

##### Dynamic Polymorphism

Use abstraction via Interfaces and Implementations on this interfaces. Every time we add a new "kind" of interface, the code will not change since the dependencies are tied to the Interface.

##### Static polymorphism

Usage of template or generics.

### The Liskov Substitution Principle (LSP)

Subclasses should be substitutable for their base classes. It means that That is, a user of a base class should continue to function properly if a derivative of that base class is passed to it.

##### The Circle/Ellipse Dilemma.

A circle is just a degenerate form of an ellipse. All circles are ellipses with coincident foci. This is-a relationship tempts us to model circles and ellipses using inheritance. We need to make codew to ensure that Circle behaves properly.

##### Clients Ruin Everything.

Since Circle can substitute an Ellipse we must ensure that when a function expects an Ellipse, the code will assert when a circle is passed, or vice versa.

##### Design by Contract

In order to be substitutable, the contract of the base class must be honored by the derived class. 

Restating the LSP once again, this time in terms of the contracts, a derived class is substitutable for its base class if:

1. Its preconditions are no stronger than the base class method.
2. Its postconditions are no weaker than the base class method.
   
Or, in other words, derived methods should expect no more and provide no less.

### The Dependency Inversion Principle (DIP)

Depend upon Abstractions. Do not depend upon concretions. 

#### Depending upon Abstractions.

Every dependency in the design should target an interface, or an abstract class. No dependency should target a concrete class.

#### Mitigating Forces.

DIP prevent you from depending upon volatile modules. i.e. A dependency upon string.h could turn very ugly when the requirements for the project forced you to change to UNICODE characters.

### The Interface Segregation Principle (ISP)

Many client specific interfaces are better than one general purpose interface.

If you have a class that has several clients, rather than loading the class with all the methods that the clients need, create specific interfaces for each client and multiply inherit them into the class.

Principles of Package Architecture
-----

### Package Cohesion Principles

#### The Release Reuse Equivalency Principle (REP)

The granule of reuse is the granule of release. Keep track of version numbers, and maintain old versions for awhile.

#### The Common Closure Principle (CCP)

Classes that change together, belong together. Use Packages to group classes.

#### The Common Reuse Principle (CRP)

Classes that aren’t reused together should not be grouped together.

### The Package Coupling Principles

Interrelationships between packages.

#### The Acyclic Dependencies Principle (ADP)

The dependencies between packages must not form cycles. To Break a cycle dependency it is recommended to create a new package or to use DIP/ISP.

#### The Stable Dependencies Principle (SDP)

Depend in the direction of stability. (Stability is related to the amount of work required to make a change.)

##### Stability Metrics

- Ca Afferent coupling. The number of classes outside the package that depend upon classes inside the package. (i.e. incoming dependencies)
- Ce Efferent Coupling. The number of classes outside the package that classes inside the package depend upon. (i.e. outgoing dependencies)
- I  Instability. I = ( Ce ) / (Ca + Ce). Range [0,1]

SDP = “Depend upon packages whose I metric is lower than yours.”

#### The Stable Abstractions Principle (SAP)

Stable packages should be abstract packages. It states the packages that are the most depended upon (i.e. stable) should also be the most abstract.

##### The Abstractness Metrics

- Nc Number of classes in the package
- Na Number of abstract classes in the package.
- A  Abstractness A = Na / Nc. Range [0,1]

In other words, the classes in such a package are conforming to the DIP.

#### The I vs A

Packages that are highly abstract and that nobody depends upon, this is **the zone of uselessness**. Packages that are concrete and have lots of incoming dependencies, this is **the zone of pain**.

Maximizing the distance between these two zones gives us a line called the **main sequence**. We’d like our packages to sit on this line if at all possible.

##### Distance Metric 

Given the A and I values of any package, we’d like to know how far that package is from the main sequence.

- D Distance D = | A + I - 1 | / sqrt(2). Range [0, ~0.707]
- D' Normalized Distance D' = |A + I – 1| Range [0,1] Zero indicates that the package is directly on the main sequence. One indicates that the package is as far away as possible from the main sequence.

These metrics measure object oriented architecture. They are imperfect, and reliance upon them as the sole indicator of a sturdy architecture would be foolhardy. However, they can be, and have been, used to help measure the dependency structure of an application.